README.md, before:

# How to use this repo to install a Shibboleth Identity Provider

## USE AT YOUR OWN RISK!!!
You can use this Ansible playbook to install a Shibboleth IdP according to the [DFN-AAI online documentation](https://doku.tid.dfn.de/de:shibidp:uebersicht). However, you do this at your own risk! 

**Please be aware of the fact that the DFN-AAI team is not responsible for any issues caused by this playbook. You still have to understand what your IdP does and you have to take care of securing your server as needed.**

## Contact and Contributions

You are welcome to send feedback about this work to hotline@aai.dfn.de. That said, we cannot adapt this playbook to all possible server setups or support you in details of getting it up and running. Please consult the [Ansible documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/index.html) for this.
To submit a merge request:

* Log in to https://jugit.fz-juelich.de/ with your institutional login to create your account.
* Drop us an e-mail to hotline@aai.dfn.de to get invited.
* Please make your changes in a branch and open a merge request.

## Prerequisites

* Use a Debian 10 or an Ubuntu 20.04 machine, other distros have not been tested.
* This playbook creates a MariaDB database for your IdP. However it does not secure your database server. You might want to prepare MariaDB beforehand, e.g. by running
```
apt install mariadb-server mariadb-client libmariadb-java
mysql_secure_installation
```
* Install Ansible on the machine you want to run the playbook from.
* Install the following community collections:

```
ansible-galaxy collection install community.crypto
ansible-galaxy collection install community.mysql
```
* Get a certificate for the webserver, e.g. from DFN-PKI. (For SAML communication this playbook will generate a selfsigned certificate for you.)

## Getting started
* Clone this repository.
* Check if the settings in ansible.cfg apply to your setup, e.g. the become_method.
* Add a file called vault-password.txt and add it to your .gitignore file to NEVER upload it to any repository.
```
touch vault-password.txt
echo "vault-password.txt" >> .gitignore
```
* Edit the file and set a vault password.
* Add the FQDN of your server to inventory/hosts, either in the group [test] which is recommended to get started or in the group [production]
* Fill in all variables in the following vars files. Do not edit the lines with references to vault files - those variables will be kept in encrypted files.
  * inventory/group_vars/all/vars: variables that apply to both, a test IdP and a production IdP
  * inventory/group_vars/test/vars: variables that apply to your test IdP only
  * inventory/group_vars/production/vars: variables that apply to your production IdP only
* Create three vault files for sensitive information with the 'ansible-vault create' command. The variables to define in the vault files can be viewed in the example files.
  * inventory/group_vars/all/vault
  * inventory/group_vars/test/vault
  * inventory/group_vars/production/vault
* Add two files named logo.png and favicon.ico to the folder ```roles/shibboleth-idp/files```.
* Run it! The whole playbook consists of different roles, tasks and subtasks that you can run independently. Refer to the group (test oder production in this case) with the ''-l'' parameter.
  * To install and configure Tomcat, Apache and Shibboleth IdP in one go run ```ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts site.yml -l test --tags shibboleth_idp```. The role shibboleth-idp will automatically run the tomcat and apache roles.
  * To run an individual role: ```ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts site.yml -l test --tags tomcat```
  * To (re-)run parts of the subtasks in the shibboleth-idp role, e.g. the LDAP configuration: ```ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts site.yml -l test --tags config-ldap```
  * To change attribute-resolver.xml or attribute-filter.xml: ```ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts site.yml -l test --tags config-attributes```

## Testing the new IdP
* Verify the IdP status page: https://YOUR-FQDN/idp/status
* Go to DFN-AAI metadata administration, create a new IdP and enter the EntityID (https://YOURFQDN/idp/shibboleth) to query all metadata from the system. Check if it looks good and save the form. There is no need to change the certificate. Ansible generated a SAML certificate for your IdP and it was imported to the metadata administration in the first go.
* Add the IdP the DFN-AAI-Test, wait 90 minutes, then try to login for testsp3.aai.dfn.de.

## Pitfalls
* If you delete the autogenerated SAML certificate, a new one will be created upon next run. Please be aware that the DFN-AAI team has to process selfsigned certificates manually at the moment! **Submit only the certificate you really want to use** and don't lose it afterwards!
* messages.properties have not been adapted.
* The Login and Logout pages have not been adapted.
* No cronjob are added - backup of user consent information is not included.
* Private IP addresses may cause issues in the webserver configuration. Adapt the according template to your needs.
* If you haven't activated local metadata for your institution in our metadata administration tool or if your local metadata file is still empty add a comment to the line ```metadata_local:``` in ```inventory/group_vars/all/vars```. Otherwise you will get a faulty ```/opt/shibboleth-idp/conf/metadata-providers.xml``` file in your IdP.

Commit message:

Rewrite certificate handling
Private keys should (if possible) only exist on the system they are needed on.
Therefore the creation of certificates is now split:
* The private key is created on the host they are used on
* The CSR is created on the host and copied to the ansible controller
* The user is guided to create a certificate from the CSR

The certificate strings are removed from the inventory and example vaults

All certificates and similiar files are stored in paths which are defined as vars to make the usage more consistent

The root and intermediate certifcates are stored in files to make the handling easier

Two playbooks are created for easier testing:
create_ownca.yml creates a selfsigned ca which is used to sign the CSR inside the selfsign_csr.yml playbook.

README.md, after:

# How to use this repo to install a Shibboleth Identity Provider

## USE AT YOUR OWN RISK!!!
You can use this Ansible playbook to install a Shibboleth IdP according to the [DFN-AAI online documentation](https://doku.tid.dfn.de/de:shibidp:uebersicht). However, you do this at your own risk!

**Please be aware of the fact that the DFN-AAI team is not responsible for any issues caused by this playbook. You still have to understand what your IdP does and you have to take care of securing your server as needed.**

## Contact and Contributions

You are welcome to send feedback about this work to hotline@aai.dfn.de. That said, we cannot adapt this playbook to all possible server setups or support you in details of getting it up and running. Please consult the [Ansible documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/index.html) for this.
To submit a merge request:

* Log in to https://jugit.fz-juelich.de/ with your institutional login to create your account.
* Drop us an e-mail to hotline@aai.dfn.de to get invited.
* Please make your changes in a branch and open a merge request.

## Prerequisites

* Use a Debian 10 or an Ubuntu 20.04 machine, other distros have not been tested.
* This playbook creates a MariaDB database for your IdP. However it does not secure your database server. You might want to prepare MariaDB beforehand, e.g. by running
```
apt install mariadb-server mariadb-client libmariadb-java
mysql_secure_installation
```
* Install Ansible on the machine you want to run the playbook from.
* Install the following community collections:

```
ansible-galaxy collection install community.crypto
ansible-galaxy collection install community.mysql
```
* A certificate for the webserver can be generated using the CSR the role produces on the first run.
  The certificate authority of your choosing, e.g. DFN-PKI, will create the certificate for you.
  (For SAML communication this playbook will generate a selfsigned certificate for you.)

## Getting started
* Clone this repository.
* Check if the settings in ansible.cfg apply to your setup, e.g. the become_method.
* Add a file called vault-password.txt and add it to your .gitignore file to NEVER upload it to any repository.
```
touch vault-password.txt
echo "vault-password.txt" >> .gitignore
```
* Edit the file and set a vault password.
* Add the FQDN of your server to inventory/hosts, either in the group [test] which is recommended to get started or in the group [production]
* Fill in all variables in the following vars files. Do not edit the lines with references to vault files - those variables will be kept in encrypted files.
  * inventory/group_vars/all/vars: variables that apply to both, a test IdP and a production IdP
  * inventory/group_vars/test/vars: variables that apply to your test IdP only
  * inventory/group_vars/production/vars: variables that apply to your production IdP only
* Create three vault files for sensitive information with the 'ansible-vault create' command. The variables to define in the vault files can be viewed in the example files.
  * inventory/group_vars/all/vault
  * inventory/group_vars/test/vault
  * inventory/group_vars/production/vault
* Add two files named logo.png and favicon.ico to the folder ```roles/shibboleth-idp/files```.
* Run it! The whole playbook consists of different roles, tasks and subtasks that you can run independently. Refer to the group (test oder production in this case) with the ''-l'' parameter.
  * To install and configure Tomcat, Apache and Shibboleth IdP in one go run ```ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts site.yml -l test --tags shibboleth_idp```. The role shibboleth-idp will automatically run the tomcat and apache roles.
  * To run an individual role: ```ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts site.yml -l test --tags tomcat```
  * To (re-)run parts of the subtasks in the shibboleth-idp role, e.g. the LDAP configuration: ```ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts site.yml -l test --tags config-ldap```
  * To change attribute-resolver.xml or attribute-filter.xml: ```ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts site.yml -l test --tags config-attributes```

## Testing the new IdP
* Verify the IdP status page: https://YOUR-FQDN/idp/status
* Go to DFN-AAI metadata administration, create a new IdP and enter the EntityID (https://YOURFQDN/idp/shibboleth) to query all metadata from the system. Check if it looks good and save the form. There is no need to change the certificate. Ansible generated a SAML certificate for your IdP and it was imported to the metadata administration in the first go.
* Add the IdP the DFN-AAI-Test, wait 90 minutes, then try to login for testsp3.aai.dfn.de.

## Pitfalls
* If you delete the autogenerated SAML certificate, a new one will be created upon next run. Please be aware that the DFN-AAI team has to process selfsigned certificates manually at the moment! **Submit only the certificate you really want to use** and don't lose it afterwards!
* messages.properties have not been adapted.
* The Login and Logout pages have not been adapted.
* No cronjob are added - backup of user consent information is not included.
* Private IP addresses may cause issues in the webserver configuration. Adapt the according template to your needs.
* If you haven't activated local metadata for your institution in our metadata administration tool or if your local metadata file is still empty add a comment to the line ```metadata_local:``` in ```inventory/group_vars/all/vars```. Otherwise you will get a faulty ```/opt/shibboleth-idp/conf/metadata-providers.xml``` file in your IdP.
